Add DH SIG website (#3176)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/community/sig/digital-humanities/index.md

---
description: "Analyse your texts, images or media content with Galaxy!"
autotoc: true
title: "Digital Humanities in Galaxy"
---

<slot name="/community/sig/common_linkbox" />

Whether you are analysing texts, images, audio data or other media, **Galaxy is here to help**!

# How can you use Galaxy for Digital Humanities analysis?

> Galaxy is a flexible setup, so it can leverage analysis in Digital Humanities and Social Sciences in various ways. Due to the platform's flexibility, you can create an analysis that fits your research needs and supports you with tools for easier research data management on the go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Galaxy is a flexible setup, so it can leverage analysis in Digital Humanities (DH) and Social Sciences in various ways. Due to the platform's flexibility, you can create an analysis that fits your research needs and supports you with tools for easier research data management on the go.
```

Here are some examples:

## Publications / Examples

    - We explored Instagram posts from the Bavarian State elections provided by the [BERD Data Portal](https://www.berd-nfdi.de/data-portal/). [Read more](https://galaxyproject.org/news/2025-05-20-berd-wf/) to see how the dataset was cleaned and mined to visualise not only the most frequent words in the post to get an idea of its contents, but also extracted and mapped where most of those posts originated in just a couple of steps in Galaxy.

>     - Check out the [poster](https://doi.org/10.11588/heidok.00036288) on Galaxy in the Humanities that Daniela and Jan presented at the [E-Science Days 2025](https://artifact.galaxyproject.org/news/2025-03-14-e-science-days/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Check out the [poster](https://doi.org/10.11588/heidok.00036288) on Galaxy in the Humanities that Daniela Schneider and Jan Leendertse presented at the [E-Science Days 2025](https://artifact.galaxyproject.org/news/2025-03-14-e-science-days/).
```

>     - A German article from Daniela and Jan building on this presentation is forthcoming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - A German article from Daniela Schneider and Jan Leendertse building on this presentation is forthcoming.
```

    - Check out [this article](https://galaxyproject.org/news/2024-09-02-chat-gpt/) to get an example workflow of how you can automatically transcribe and translate an audio file using Galaxy.

# What is available?

To make your own analysis, start by checking out the tools (the term we use in Galaxy for programs) in your Galaxy instance, for example, [Galaxy Europe](https://usegalaxy.eu/). On the website, you can access the tools by clicking on the bar on the left-hand side. The second icon there is **tools**. You can search there or click on the arrows and search for more details in the help text.

> You can combine various Galaxy tools into [workflows](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/history-to-workflow/tutorial.html) to automate and re-run the analysis or [export](https://galaxyproject.org/news/2024-05-03-inveniordm-integration/)the data you created to a repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can combine various Galaxy tools into [workflows](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/galaxy-interface/tutorials/history-to-workflow/tutorial.html) to automate and re-run the analysis or [export](https://galaxyproject.org/news/2024-05-03-inveniordm-integration/) the data you created to a repository.
```

## Tools

This is a non-exhaustive overview of Galaxy tools applicable to Humanities and Social sciences use-cases. 

### **General tools**

>     - remove beginning, select lines, add lines, search in text files, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Text cleaning tools such as text manipulation, select lines, add lines, search in text files, etc.
```

    - **Filter and Sort for tabular data**: Unique, Unique lines, Sort, Select random lines, Select first lines (head), Select last lines (tail), Remove beginning, Cut columns, Search in textfiles, XPath, Column arrange, Query tabular, Filter data on any column, Sort data, Select lines, Remove columns, Sort Column Order
    - **Join, Substract and Group for tabular data**: Join two files, Split file, Reverse, Transpose, Datamash, Subtract, Join two Datasets, Group data by a column
    - **Further**:  Tabular data prediction using TabPFN 

### **Audio tools**
    - Audio Player: Find the player to listen to audio files in Galaxy on the left-hand side panel under *Visualisations*.
    - Whisper: Audio to text conversion
    - FFmpeg Format Converter: Convert between video and audio formats   

### **Image tools**
    - flux: text to image conversion
    - Convert image format
    - Enhance contrast: image pre-processing
    
### **File or format conversion**

>     - General tools: Tabular to CSV, CSV to Tabular, convert delimiter to TAB, 

Reviewer: I think something is missing here: "convert delimiter to TAB". If I understand it correctly, delimiter is like what separates different columns such as comma, semi-colon, tab, etc. So, you can convert, for example, comma-delimited to tab-delimited format.
Am I wrong?

Author: no, that's it. And you mean this is not on the same level? In that case, I will remove it. Thanks for pointing this out.

    - markitdown: Converting documents to markdown format - for easier processing with large language models.
    - Convert image format
    - FFmpeg Format Converter: Convert between video and audio formats

### **Interactive tools**
    - OpenRefine
    - R-Studio

>     - GIS

Reviewer: Just because I am curious. Is GIS useful in digital humanities? I can guess an use-case but I have never heard this before.

Author: yes, depending on what you want to do. Haven't used it but know others do.
an example with qgis here:
https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/geocoding-qgis

>     - Jupyter Notebooks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Jupyter Notebook
```

### **Visualisations**
    - general: Bar chart, Histogram, Scatterplot, Plotting tool for multiple series, Boxplot, etc.
    - Word cloud

### **Research tools**

>     -  OpenAlex explorer: REsearch and fetch papers from OpenAlex using DOI or title/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -  OpenAlex explorer: REsearch and fetch papers from OpenAlex using DOI or title
```

### **Domain-specific tools:

>     - OBO for working with ontologies

Reviewer: I think OBO is a file format similar to txt or csv. The tool that we have on usegalaxy.eu is called "ONTO-ToolKit" and this is the paper: https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-S12-S8

But I could be wrong. Double check with someone else if you want to change it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - ONTO-ToolKit working with OBO files for ontologies
```

Author: I cannot find ONTO under that name in the tool list - am I doing sth wrong?

### **Work in progress**
    - WhisperX: Audio conversion including speaker diarisation
    - E-Scriptorium: Handwritten text-recognition (HTR)
    - Stanford Core NLP

> If tools are missing or information is not up-to-date in the list, please help us! Contact [Daniela](mailto:schneidd@informatik.uni-freiburg.de).

Reviewer: I know using our 1st name is common inside the team but I feel it could be more professional if we add our last name while we are writing things for general public. And a question: Do you want the link to be `mailto:schneidd@informatik.uni-freiburg.de` or `schneidd@informatik.uni-freiburg.de`

## Workflows and tutorials

> You can find an overview of the existing tutorials on the dedicated DH-section of the [Galaxy Training Network](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/digital-humanities/). Those are open educational resources (OER) that you can create from your workflows or reuse in teaching and training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find an overview of the existing tutorials on the dedicated DH-section of the [Galaxy Training Network](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/digital-humanities/). Those are open educational resources (OER) that you can create from your workflows or reuse in teaching and training. Documentation for providing further tutorials can be accessed [here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/).
```

In addition to those mentioned above, we are currently working on:
- Galaxy introduction for Digital Humanities
- Using OpenRefine in Galaxy to analyse data

## Training material and events

The Galaxy community organises regularly scheduled training events. You can check the [event pages here](/events/) to get the latest ones.

## Join us

> Anybody interested in Humanities and Social Sciences in Galaxy is welcome to join this community! **Everybody is Welcome!**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anybody interested in Digital Humanities and Social Sciences in Galaxy is welcome to join this community! **Everybody is Welcome!**
```

    - Convert coordinates to label map: converts a GeoJSON of an image with rectangles to a label image (or binary image) for later cropping
    - Crop image: for cutting of images 
    
### **File or format conversion**
    - General tools: Tabular to CSV, CSV to Tabular, convert delimiter to TAB, 
    - markitdown: Converting documents to markdown format - for easier processing with large language models.
    - Convert image format
    - FFmpeg Format Converter: Convert between video and audio formats

### **Interactive tools**
    - OpenRefine: data cleaning and enrichment
    - R-Studio
    - GIS
    - Jupyter Notebook

### **Visualisations**
    - general: Bar chart, Histogram, Scatterplot, Plotting tool for multiple series, Boxplot, etc.
    - Word cloud

### **Research tools**
    -  OpenAlex explorer: Research and fetch papers from OpenAlex using DOI or title

### **Domain-specific tools:
    - [ONTO-ToolKit](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-S12-S8) working with OBO files for ontologies

### **Work in progress**
    - WhisperX: Audio conversion including speaker diarisation
    - E-Scriptorium: Handwritten text-recognition (HTR)
    - Stanford Core NLP

> If tools are missing or information is not up-to-date in the list, please help us! Contact [Daniela Schneider](mailto:schneidd@informatik.uni-freiburg.de).

Author: ```suggestion
If tools are missing or information is not up-to-date in the list, please help us! We are available via this [Matrix Channel](https://matrix.to/#/#galaxyproject-digital-humanities:matrix.org)
```
